Hi and welcome back.
In this video we're going to look at
how we can print our tree.
And as part of printing our tree,
we're going to have to look at something called recursion.
Recursion is something that can be quite tricky
to really fully get your head around
but it's a very simple concept, in fact.
Something I'll say about recursion, and also binary trees,
is that you won't be using these very often
in your day jobs.
I, for example, work in web development.
I do a lot of sort of back-end development
and front end with JavaScript and so forth
and back end with Python.
And I have never used binary trees
or recursion in my day job.
Nonetheless, it's something that can pop up
in coding challenges, interviews and so forth,
so it's good to know about it and it's also,
in software, it's used behind the scenes,
like in databases and things like that.
So it's useful to know about it
and that's why we're sort of going through it.
But don't worry too much about
fully getting your head around all the use cases
and how you use them extensively.
It's just not really worth it.
Although I will give you some more resources
in case you're interested.
In order to traverse in order,
we are going to use recursion.
So, let's first, inorder_recursive.
I'll type out a wee method here.
I'll type out a wee method
and I'll explain exactly what's happening.
And also, as part of this, I'll explain, of course,
what recursion is.
'cause I know that we've not done that yet.
What we've done here in this inorder method is,
it doesn't take any arguments,
but it calls another private method in Python.
By the way, I'm not sure if I've mentioned this, but,
when your methods and your variables
start with an underscore, that means they're private,
or you don't want other people calling them.
So we call this private method inorder_recursive,
with self.head as the argument.
Self.head becomes current_node
in this inorder_recursive method.
So this inorder_recursive method, all it's going to do,
is it's gonna say, if the current_node is none,
then we're gonna return.
Okay, we're gonna terminate the method
if current_node is none, we're gonna terminate.
Then what it's going to do,
is it's gonna say,
call itself, but
with current_node.left.
Okay, so as you can see,
this inorder_recursive method calls itself.
This is recursion.
Recursion is when a method or a function calls itself.
What happens when you call yourself is
something rather interesting.
We're gonna talk about it in just a moment.
And then we're gonna print the current_node
and then we are going to
call ourselves with the right node.
Here's what happens when you do recursion.
The inorder method calls self.inorder_recursive.
So we end up here.
Now, Python knows that the inorder_recursive method
was called by the inorder method.
It knows that.
It keeps track of who called who, for example,
so it can tell you in the stack traces in your errors.
So it knows that the inorder method called us.
We run through this.
Presumably we pass.
And then we call ourselves again inorder_recursive.
So, we go back to the top.
Now current_node is a different node.
But we know that we got called by inorder_recursive.
So Python knows inorder called inorder_recursive,
inorder_recursive called inorder_recursive.
Then we go again.
If we call ourselves again,
Python now starts constructing
a collection of how did these calls go.
Who called who?
What were the arguments or the values of the parameters
when each method was called?
Eventually we reach the leftmost node of the tree.
We print it out.
Then we go right and eventually
we sort of are at the right, or the leftmost
or rather rightmost node in the left branch of the tree
and we reach the end of the method.
What happens then is the method returns control
to whoever called it.
So, if inorder calls inorder_recursive
and inorder_recursive calls itself,
that constructs a collection of method calls
and then, when the method returns,
we go back to the previous call.
It's difficult to explain, without actually looking at it.
So what we're going to do is
we are going to use this and debug it.
So I'm gonna set a wee breakpoint here
before this method call happens
and we're gonna go over to our app.py
and print or do tree.inorder.
We're gonna call the inorder method here
after we ad a few nodes and then, in the binary-tree file,
we're gonna set a breakpoint
in the inorder_recursive method.
Then we're going to debug.
Now here begins the interesting part.
And I'm gonna try to go quite slowly with this
because I know it's a tricky concept.
I'm probably, my explanations really haven't helped so far.
Here on the left, we're gonna start looking
at this main thread.
It's not something we've looked at before in Python.
But the main thread,
now that you know a little bit about
asynchronous programming and threads and so forth in Python,
the main thread
is really the thread that does stuff in Python
and here you can see that
we don't have any other threads in this application.
We've not launched any other threads.
If you click any of these places,
you'll be taken to where the call started
for where you currently are.
So we're currently here, in this line,
which is in our binary-tree file, line 32.
So here, the main thread tells us
that we are inside the inorder_recursive function
in the binary_tree.py file, line 32.
And it tells us that this function
was called by the inorder function.
See this is directly below where we currently are down here.
So the inorder function binary_tree, line 27,
was who called us.
And who called them?
Well, it was app.py, line eight.
So if we go to app.py, line eight
you can see that tree.inorder was called here.
Who called app.py?
Some Python stuff.
The Python debugger execute file.
Don't worry about that.
For us, the execution started at app.py,
then called in_order and then called inorder_recursive.
The current_node in this call is node nine.
Because that's the head that we called with.
Now, we can go into this function.
Let's go in by doing this, Step Into.
Notice how now things changed.
The current_node for one, is node five
because that's current_node.left as it was before.
And now the main thread has changed.
We are in the inorder_recursive function, line 30.
We were called by the inorder_recursive function in line 32,
this one here, and that was called by inorder
and that was called by app.py.
And one of the great thing about PyCharm is
that you can actually click on it.
And when you click on it,
you can see that the current_node in here
was node nine, the head.
You click back to where we currently are,
the current_node is node five.
So, once again, let's Step Over,
we go into this line again.
Current_node.left is none.
And we know that.
So let's Step Into once again.
Notice how now we are in this recursive stack.
By the way, this thing here is a stack,
because new things get pushed at the top.
We're gonna see how they pop from the top as well.
Now we are at the last call in this chain.
Current_node is now none because the current_node
in the previous execution had a left of none.
So right now, current_node is none.
So what we do is we are going to just Return.
When we Return, this method call terminates
and we go back to the previous one.
So notice how now we're gonna jump down here,
but this is going to disappear.
See?
The method call we were at before disappeared
because that's the end of that call
and we go back to where we were before.
If we Step Into, notice how
it doesn't go into this method anymore
because we've already ran that.
Now it goes over to the print.
Then we can go over to the next line.
We can Step Into this line
and, once again, we are at the inorder_recursive method.
But, once again, the current_node is none.
If you check back, we're still at node five here.
We're still at node five here
and all that's happened is the right was none.
So when we called inorder_recursive with the right node,
that is none so, once again,
we're gonna return, and we end up back here.
You know that when we reach the end of a method
in Python, the end of a function,
that returns.
So, as soon as we press Step Over,
this function is gonna terminate.
Guess where we're gonna go next.
We're gonna go back here.
We're gonna go back to the previous execution
where the current_node was nine.
So I'm gonna go back to where we currently are,
press Step Over, and notice that's exactly what happens.
And once again, if we press Step Into,
this has already happened.
We've already ran the inorder_recursive function
for the left node of current_node.
Notice how we're back at the top of our stack
and the current_node is the head.
So once again we print.
And then we go back into the inorder_recursive
onto the right branch.
So, current_node now is node eleven.
Node eleven is the right node of the head.
So, going back to where we currently are,
this is not gonna happen.
This is going to happen.
We're gonna go into the inorder_recursive with a left.
The left is none because we didn't add anymore nodes.
Once again, this is gonna be none.
This is gonna return.
And, once again, were gonna go over to the right,
which is also none.
And that's just gonna return.
And now we have already, by the way,
printed out our nodes
because this print statement has happened there
in between everything that's been going on.
So now we're gonna finish this method
because we've already run through the recursion.
We are now at the end of the inorder_recursive method
with the head as current_node.
So when we press Next,
that is the end of the recursive method
and we can continue
and we've reached the end of our programme.
This is recursion.
Really important in recursion is
you end up with that stack of method calls
and when one returns, it goes back to the previous call.
So this is why we can sort of go deeper into our tree
by going left and then left and then left and then left
until we reach the end,
and then it just goes back one by one.
Really, please, use the debugger
to inspect and learn and play around with this,
because it's a tricky thing to get right.
Recursion is difficult to get your head around.
It's also not used all that often
in what I'd call product-oriented software companies.
But, nonetheless, it's an interesting thing.
And it's useful for things like these.
I'd also like to give you a challenge.
This code here prints the tree inorder.
I'd like to give you a challenge
of printing the tree, preorder.
So, you can go ahead and do that.
Try to print the tree, preorder,
which is going to be a very similar piece of code,
but just to give you a little bit more experience
writing recursive code.
Hopefully you got that.
All you have to do, if you wanna write this in preorder,
is, of course, move the print
to before the other things happen.
And then you end up with preorder
and you have to, of course,
change these names there as well.
That's it for this video.
Hopefully, you enjoyed looking at recursion
in PyCharm here.
And looking at the inorder traversal of a tree.
By the way, just before we finish,
of course if you just run the file,
you end up with five, nine, 11 printed it in order
in-order order, I guess, in-order format.
And, so again, that's it.
Thank you for joining me.
And I'll see you on the next one.